[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Did you
know what you're eating
could be poison?
I'm not kidding you--
actual poison from
genetically modified foods,
things that could harm you.
Our guest on "Beyond Belief"--
Jeffery Smith.
He's the executive
director of the Institute
of Responsible Technology.
He is also a leading
expert in the dangers
of genetically modified foods.
Eating genetically modified
foods could hurt you,
couldn't it, Jeffrey?
>>JEFFREY SMITH: Absolutely.
More and more, we're
getting to the point
that it may be creating enormous
diseases across the United
States and around the world.
>>NOORY: And we just
don't know it, do we?
As individuals.
>>SMITH: Most recent
study, 25% of Americans
have a fatty liver problem.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>SMITH: It turns
out that Roundup,
which is sprayed on most
GMOs, at tiny concentrations
promotes that type
of fatty liver.
>>NOORY: How did you get
involved in all of this?
>>SMITH: In 1996 I
went to a lecture
from a scientist who was a
genetic engineer who blew
the whistle on the technology.
He knew that it was
completely unsafe,
that there are all sorts
of unpredicted side effects
that can occur.
And yet Monsanto was
going to go ahead and feed
the products of
this infant science
to the entire population
and release it
in the environment, where the
self-propagating pollution
of the gene pool through
cross pollination,
et cetera, would last
essentially forever.
When I heard about that, it
became an A-plus emergency,
like the highest
level of concern.
Because again-- everyone
who eats, all living beings,
and all future generations.
>>NOORY: Now, I've got to say,
whenever we deal with GMOs
and you on "Coast
to Coast," we've
always called Monsanto
for a statement.
They really don't
want to get involved.
>>SMITH: Oh, no.
And they won't debate me.
And see, the thing
is, we've always
won the scientific debates.
So instead, they
try and discredit
through a kind of internet group
of fake academics and front
people that were recently
exposed by "The New York
Times."
>>NOORY: What I want to talk
with you about today, Jeffrey,
new technologies with GMOs,
labeling issues, and what's
happening around the country
there and everything else.
But here's the other thing.
You go into a supermarket,
and you pick a tomato.
Sometimes they taste
like cardboard,
by the way, or some
corn or soybeans
or whatever the products may be.
How we know that we're
eating GMO foods?
>>SMITH: Well, if it's the
basic fruit or vegetable,
you don't unless it's organic.
But you also have to know
which GMOs are out there.
>>NOORY: So when
we're in a store
and we're picking out
tomatoes or corn or soybeans,
how do we know that we're
picking up GMO foods?
>> Are you eating
genetically modified foods?
Which foods contain Genetically
Modified Ingredients, or GMOs?
How do you know if a food is
genetically modified or not?
Which foods are
natural, and which foods
were genetically engineered
by scientists in a laboratory?
>>NOORY: So, Jeffrey,
how do we know?
>>SMITH: Well, if it's
organic, it's not GMO.
It's not supposed to be.
But if you're going to
the produce section,
you have to know which
are the potential GMOs.
In fact, there's
only 11 GMOs that
have been commercialized
right now-- soy, corn, cotton,
canola, sugar beets, which
is used for sugar, alfalfa,
and then papaya from
Hawaii or China, zucchini
or yellow squash, and two
new ones introduced just
recently-- apples and potatoes.
>>NOORY: And what
about tomatoes?
>>SMITH: Tomatoes were taken
off the market years ago.
They were the first genetically
modified food to be approved.
>>NOORY: They were.
I remember that.
>>SMITH: Yes, the
Flavr Savr Tomato.
>>NOORY: But no more?
>>SMITH: No more.
Because they taste
like cardboard.
That's why.
>>SMITH: That's right, exactly.
>>NOORY: Now, so, in
most cases, they're
not labeled as GMOs, right?
>>SMITH: Right.
>>NOORY: You don't know.
How do people know?
>>SMITH: Well, more
and more, companies
are labeling their
products as non-GMO.
Because the average American now
believes that GMOs are unsafe.
And so the food
companies are rushing
to market new formulations
for their products
so they can boldly
announce. non-GMO.
So Nestle advertises
on television
that its coffee
creamer is non-GMO.
So you know that the non-GMO
movement is making its mark.
>>NOORY: Impact.
>>SMITH: It's making
its impact-- right.
>>NOORY: How many years have
you been doing this now?
>>SMITH: 21.
>>NOORY: 21 years
trying to educate people
about the dangers of GMOs.
What is it specifically
that creates that danger?
>>SMITH: Well, there's
the GMO process itself,
and a recent study shows that
the genetic engineering process
of a certain type of corn
increased the proteins
in the corn that are not
only linked to allergies
and to cancer, but
they're called putrescine
and cadaverine because they--
>>NOORY: Putrescine?
≫>SMITH: Yeah,
because they create--
>>NOORY: Like for putrid?
>>SMITH: Exactly.
These proteins are responsible
for the smell of a rotting,
dead body.
>>NOORY: Oh, good.
>>SMITH: And they are in higher
amounts in Monsanto's corn.
>>NOORY: And we eat that.
>>SMITH: That's right.
So the process of
genetic engineering
itself can cause
these problems--
higher levels of allergens
and toxins and putrescine.
Then you have corn that produces
its own toxic insecticide,
which breaks open the stomach
of the insects and kills it.
And a 2012 study showed that it
can poke holes in human cells
as well.
And a recent study showed that
rats were fed this Bt corn,
it's called, they
had severe damage
in their digestive tract.
>>NOORY: Sometimes
you just wake up,
and you just don't feel well.
You don't know why.
You went to bed
the night before.
You had something to eat.
You thought it was good.
How do we know that
the GMOs that we
may have eaten
accidentally the night
before are contributing
to that feeling of malaise
the next day?
>>SMITH: It's an
excellent question.
So what I did is
I asked audiences
at about 150
lectures, what did you
notice when you changed your
diet to non-GMO or organic?
What did you notice got better?
And people raised their hand
and say digestive problems
or mood or behavior, like
anxiety, skin problems, energy.
>>NOORY: All the worst parts.
>>SMITH: Overweight
and all that stuff.
And then I'd say, OK, how
many people noticed that?
And I'd see the show of hands.
And it was a very
consistent number of people.
And then I surveyed
3,600 people who
said that they got better from
switching to non-GMO, and just
like in the audiences,
the number-one response
was gastrointestinal.
The number two was
increased energy.
Number three was
reduced weight problems.
Number four was brain fog,
and then all these others--
skin conditions,
anxiety, et cetera.
So we have a general idea.
And when I interviewed doctors
who prescribed non-GMO diets,
they back it up saying
in thousands of patients
that they prescribed non-GMO
diets to, it's similar.
But if you look at the
animal feeding studies,
when they force-feed
the animals GMOs,
they suffer from very similar
categories of diseases.
And when livestock
are taken off of GMOs,
they get better from very
similar categories of diseases.
And these are the diseases
that are on the rise
in the US population, rising
in parallel with the increased
use of GMOs and the Roundup
herbicide sprayed on most
genetically modified organisms.
>>NOORY: And this is definitive.
>>SMITH: Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
But those charts,
it's just correlation.
We can't say that
because they happen
to rise in parallel,
autism, diabetes, deaths
from senile dementia,
Alzheimer's, et cetera,
we can't say that there's
causative relationship just
from the chart.
But if you look, for example,
at Roundup herbicide, which
is sprayed on GMOs, it is a
probable human carcinogen,
according to the World
Health Organization.
It can mess up our hormones.
It's an antibiotic,
so it can wreak havoc
with our gut bacteria.
It can block the
production of the building
blocks of serotonin,
melatonin, and dopamine.
>>NOORY: Geez.
Is it killing honeybees?
>>SMITH: It is very
likely a major contributor
to colony collapse disorder.
Because when they found
just regular environmentally
relevant doses of Roundup and
they applied it into a hive,
they found about 30%
death rate in the bees.
>>NOORY: 30%.
>>SMITH: Yeah.
They couldn't make their
way back to the hive.
They lost their navigation.
So we think that Roundup
is contributing, along
with other pesticides.
And it's interesting.
There was a company
called Beelogics
that was discovering the cause
of colony collapse disorder.
Guess which major
company bought Beelogics?
Monsanto.
So now they no longer
do any research
on the relationship between
Roundup and colony collapse
disorder.
>>NOORY: Now, the GMO foods--
some of them have
the insecticide
built into it, right?
>>SMITH: That's right.
That's right-- the Bt toxin.
Originally it comes
from soil bacteria.
And if you just
gather the bacteria
and spray it on a crop, it
will kill certain insects.
So the scientists take the
gene from the bacterium
and take it out, multiply
it millions of times,
put it into a gun,
shoot that gun
into a plate of
millions of corn cells,
hoping that the gene
makes it into the DNA.
>>NOORY: Takes it and keeps it.
>>SMITH: Right.
Then they clone
that into a plant,
and now every single
cell of that corn plant
has a little gene-sized
spray bottle.
And when the bug
eats the corn, it
breaks open little holes in
the walls of the intestines
to kill the bug.
Now, the biotech industry
said, well, Bt is safe.
We could use it in organic food.
So it must be safe
to create Bt corn.
Well, they ignore the fact
that when you just spray it on,
it biodegrades.
It washes off.
But when it's
built into the corn
at thousands of times the
concentration of the spray,
it's encapsulated.
So we consume it.
>>NOORY: That's got to
affect a human being.
>>SMITH: Oh, absolutely.
I believe it does.
>>NOORY: And what
about accumulation?
>>SMITH: Well, accumulation
is interesting.
It depends on where
it goes in the body.
A study that was
done in Canada found
that 93% of the
pregnant women tested
had the Bt toxin from
Monsanto's corn circulating
in their blood.
And so did 80% of
their unborn fetuses.
Now, in a mouse study, they
found that the Bt toxin
is toxic to blood cells.
So if it's in our
bloodstream, it
might be causing
havoc in our blood.
And if it's in the unborn fetus,
there's no blood-brain barrier.
What this toxin does is it
pokes holes in human cells.
So if it gets into the brain,
we might have this toxin
from Monsanto's
corn poking holes
in human brain cells of the
offspring of this generation.
>>NOORY: God.
This is frightening.
>>SMITH: Well, it's frightening,
but we do have a way out.
We do have the ability to
buy non-GMO and organic food.
And people say they get better
from all sorts of diseases.
>>NOORY: How soon?
>>SMITH: Well, I talked
to one doctor who
had 5,000 patients,
prescribed non-GMO diets,
and she said the mental issues,
like anxiety and depression,
can go away right away.
The allergic symptoms and
asthma, three to seven days.
Gastrointestinal, two months.
But you can rebuild the
system over two years.
This was her experience.
Now, I actually was skeptical.
When people used to
come up to me and say,
I can feel the
effects of GMOs, I
didn't really believe
then until a doctor
started prescribing it.
So I said to her, can
I come to your office
and meet your patients?
And so the first
person I introduced
had been on a non-GMO
diet for 24 days.
Three days into that, her
Crohn's disease symptoms
disappeared.
Her hair stopped falling out.
Her skin condition
started clearing up.
And she had lost 10 pounds.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>SMITH: And then patient
after patient after patient.
Now, when people
get rid of GMOs,
because they're not labeled,
they gotta do a strategy.
Maybe they buy organic.
Maybe they switch to
non-processed foods.
So I was at a loss to figure
out, well, is it the non-GMO,
or is it all these other things?
At the same time I went to her
clinic, I went to some farms
where they put their pigs or
cows on non-GMO soy or corn.
>>NOORY: Big difference.
>>SMITH: And there
was a big difference.
And it was the same.
So the farmers were saying,
no more diarrhea in my pigs,
and the clinic
patients were saying,
no more irritable bowel.
Calling it different words,
but it was the same thing.
And both after
switching to non-GMO.
>>NOORY: I've had dinner
with so many people who
are complaining about
symptoms like what you've just
been talking about.
And they have no
idea what it is.
And I mention GMOs,
and they're beginning
to learn this now, Jeffrey.
Are you finding
out that people are
beginning to understand this?
>>SMITH: Absolutely.
Thousands of doctors are
prescribing non-GMO diets.
Millions of people--
the average American
is now concerned about GMOs.
More than half are
concerned about GMOs.
And what doctors tell
us is very interesting.
You asked how long it takes
to have the influence.
When people clean out their
diet but then backslide--
they go out for sometimes
even a single meal--
old problems start to rise.
You see, different people
have different sensitivities.
The same GMO, the same Roundup
can be fed to one family,
and one person has autism,
another person has a tumor,
and another person has eczema.
And when they change the
diet-- and I point this out
in my new film,
"Secret Ingredients."
One family with 21
chronic conditions,
they switched to
non-GMO organic,
and all of the
conditions disappeared.
They were different conditions
with different people,
but they all disappeared.
>>NOORY: There is a gene
called an epicyte, which
affects men and women
in a very different way.
>> In 2001, a small California
biotech company called Epicyte
patented a product,
patented a gene,
which causes both men and women
who eat it in the form of any
product to produce
antibodies to sperm.
If the men eat the
epicyte gene, they
produce antibodies
to their own sperm,
rendering them
irreversibly sterile.
If women eat the epicyte gene,
when they have intercourse,
their bodies produce
antibodies to the sperm that
has been deposited, and
they become infertile
through the destruction
of the sperm.
Now, DuPont and Monsanto formed
a joint venture, purchased
the epicyte firm, and,
quote, "commercialized"
the epicyte gene.
>>NOORY: Why in
God's name would they
want to use a gene like
that, sterilizing the planet?
>>SMITH: Well,
theoretically, they're
just using corn to produce
it more economically.
I'll let you decide
whether they're
having any devious interests.
But not just the
corn that's supposed
to create a spermicide,
which theoretically was never
made public--
it turns out that there's
a lot of information
linking GMOs with sterility.
In our film "Secret
Ingredients,"
we went to a clinic,
a chiropractic clinic,
where they put infertile
couples on 100% organic diet.
They had 77 so far, and
all 77 now have kids--
100%.
>>NOORY: Wow.
Remarkable.
>>SMITH: I know.
It's incredible.
>>NOORY: You don't get
those numbers in anything.
>>SMITH: I know.
And the thing is
right now, infertility
is through the charts
in the United States.
There was a study done
by a Russian Academy
of Sciences scientist.
She fed Roundup-Ready
soybeans to female rats
before they got
pregnant, and after they
had their kids, more
than half of their babies
died within three weeks,
compared to a 10% death rate
when they ate regular soybeans.
Another Russian Academy
of Sciences scientist fed
hamsters Roundup-Ready soy.
By the third generation,
most were sterile.
The government of Austria found
some sterility in its mice
that were fed genetically
modified corn.
And we see a lot of people--
I've heard this.
People can't get pregnant.
They can't get pregnant.
They switch to organic, and all
of a sudden, they get pregnant.
>>NOORY: Can you believe the
stores when it says organic?
Are you actually getting
organic fruits, vegetables,
whatever you're buying?
>>SMITH: I mean, if it comes
from China, I have no idea.
I mean, when it comes imported
from another country--
organic is pretty
well regulated.
They have site visits,
document reviews.
>>NOORY: Same with chicken
and things like that.
They say organic.
>>SMITH: Yeah, I mean,
there is occasional fraud.
But it's not a common thing.
So I trust organic.
And organic does not allow
intentional use of GMOs.
Sometimes there
is contamination.
It does not allow
the intentional use
of Roundup and other
nasty synthetic chemicals.
And Roundup is one
of the major reasons
why GMOs are so dangerous.
Most GMOs are considered
Roundup-Ready.
They're designed by Monsanto
to spray the whole field
with Roundup herbicide so
that it kills the weeds
but the GMOs survive.
So 80% of the GMOs
are Roundup-Ready
and mean Roundup-drenched.
But Roundup is also sprayed
on wheat, barley, rye, rice,
potatoes, sweet potatoes, sugar
cane, and a whole bunch of non
GMO crops just before
harvest to dry it down,
like three to five days.
So we're eating wheat--
>>NOORY: We're eating it.
>>SMITH: We're eating wheat
that's drenched in Roundup.
It's not GMO, because
what is not GMO.
But all of a sudden,
we're eating it.
And it's like our
bodies can react
to that, which is why
we say non-GMO is good,
but organic is necessary.
If you have an option to buy
organic, go there every time.
And only when you
can't get organic,
then get something
that says non-GMO.
>>NOORY: Even though it
may cost a little more.
>>SMITH: Oh, listen.
In our film "Secret
Ingredients,"
there's a family that was
spending about $18,000 a year
in health care costs
with five children.
They switched to organic.
The next year it went down
to $9,000, the next year down
to $3,000.
>>NOORY: Dramatic.
>>SMITH: So I would
say for the big picture
and for the quality
of life, absolutely.
>>NOORY: What's the
initial reasoning
for GMOs in the first place?
There's a profit
reason, obviously.
>>SMITH: Oh, yeah.
Monsanto's patent on
Roundup was expiring,
and so they created
Roundup-Ready seeds
so that when you buy
the Roundup-Ready seeds,
you sign a contract
that you only buy
Monsanto's version of Roundup.
So it was a way to
increase their dominance
in selling these herbicides.
Now, they claimed after
the pushback in Europe,
oh, it's to feed the world.
But it actually wasn't
designed to feed the world.
And the world's experts
agree that it is actually
not a solution to world hunger.
It works against that.
>>NOORY: Why does it seem
like Europe and Hawaii,
part of the United
States, of course,
are a little more aggressive
in trying to tell us
about the dangers of GMOs?
>>SMITH: Well, Europe,
the press was open.
Back in 1999, there
was a scientist
who was given a bunch of
money, Dr. Arpad Pusztai,
to figure out how to test
for the safety of GMOs.
And he discovered that GMOs
were inherently dangerous
and immediately was
gagged and fired
and stripped of
responsibilities and attacked.
When his gag order was lifted
by an order of parliament,
over 700 articles were written
in the UK alone within a month.
Within 10 weeks,
so many consumers
were concerned about GMOs
Unilever said, OK, no more
GMOs in our European brands--
same thing with Nestle, same
thing with everyone else.
But in the United States,
the media never covered it.
And so the same
companies that removed
GMOs for the discerning
European consumer
continued to sell the
unaware American consumer
the GMOs in their Frosted Flakes
and their tortillas, et cetera.
>>NOORY: And the doctor did
a study on rats and potatoes.
>>SMITH: Yes.
>> He took a potato that
was genetically engineered
to produce an insecticide
and fed one group of rats
the genetically
engineered potato.
He found another group
of rats natural potatoes
and a third group of
rats natural potatoes,
plus their meal was spiked
with the same insecticide
that the GM potato was
engineered to produce.
So you have GM potato, natural
potato, and natural potato
plus an insecticide.
And all three had a complete
and balanced diet as well.
>> We measured all
sorts of things--
growth, for example, how these
young animals were growing,
and what happened
to their inside
and what happened to
their immune system.
And it became clear that
the GM had a slower growth.
It had problems with internal
development of its organs.
And it certainly knocked
out the immune system.
>>NOORY: What more evidence
do we need than that?
>>SMITH: What was interesting
about those potatoes is
that it was only the
genetically modified potato that
caused the problem,
not the potato
that had been sprayed
with the insecticide.
And so it was the process
of genetic engineering
that caused the problem.
And so I've interviewed Dr.
Pusztai for hours and hours
and hours, and he was concerned
that GMOs on the market
would have the same
problems in humans
as they had with the rats
that occurred in just 10 days.
>>NOORY: There's no
question about that.
So I would guess that if
you're going to pick a food,
the first should be
organic, the second should
be one that's probably sprayed,
and then the third is the GMO.
>>SMITH: Well, here's the thing.
The first is organic,
the second is non-GMO.
So if you have a loaf
of bread that's non-GMO,
it still might be sprayed.
So organic is better.
It's not allowed
to contain GMOs.
>>NOORY: So GMOs--
bottom of the list.
>>SMITH: Well, you don't
want to eat GMOs for sure.
>>NOORY: At all.
>>SMITH: Sure, absolutely.
And have you found in your
own diet that you avoid GMOs?
>>SMITH: Oh, yeah.
And I travel seven to nine
months a year for 13 years.
So I know.
I call the restaurant beforehand
and say, what oil do you
cook your food with?
And if they say vegetable
oil, it's soybean,
or they say cottonseed
or canola or corn oil,
then I know that they're cooking
their food in a genetically
modified oil.
So it has probably higher levels
of Roundup and other problems.
So I'll find out if
they can cook mine
in olive oil or
some other non-oil.
And then most of the
things are visible.
You can tell.
If it is corn on the cob
or tortillas or tofu,
it's from soy or corn.
And if it doesn't say
non-GMO or organic,
it's going to be GMO if
produced in North America.
>>NOORY: Who are the
mental misfits who approved
GMOs in the first place?
And how did that happen?
>>SMITH: Michael Taylor was
in charge of policy at the FDA
when the GMO policy
came to pass.
>>NOORY: A lawyer.
>>SMITH: A lawyer.
And the policy said, we
don't see any information
showing GMOs are
significantly different,
so no safety
studies were needed.
No labeling was needed.
And companies like
Monsanto that told us
that Agent Orange,
PCBs, and DDT were safe
could introduce a GMO without
telling the FDA or consumers.
Michael Taylor-- they created
a position for him at the FDA
to be in charge
after the White House
had told the FDA
to promote GMOs.
He had been Monsanto's
attorney, later Monsanto's vice
president, still later the
US food czar under the Obama
administration.
>>NOORY: And where is he now?
>>SMITH: Well, he just left
the Obama administration,
and I don't have to
track him anymore.
[LAUGHING] So my
feeling is this,
that the government has been
marching lockstep with Monsanto
and the biotech industry.
If you read the WikiLeaks,
you can find the ambassador
to France said, we should
create a retaliation list
against the countries
that are resisting GMOs
and cause some pain.
The Spanish ambassador said that
Washington should help Brussels
create a more pro-GMO
policy and that they just
met with the Monsanto
director in the area,
and they want to support
the Spanish government
to introduce more GMOs.
So it's basically
Monsanto's enforcement wing
around the world.
And then we have the USDA
and the EPA all pushing GMOs.
So the solution to
GMOs, in my opinion,
is not to try and
convince the US government
to go against their
support of Monsanto.
It's to get the consumers
to stop eating it
so we see the tipping point that
occurred in Europe happen here.
And that's exactly
what's happening.
>>NOORY: This portion
of "Beyond Belief"
has been brought to
you by GMO foods.
I'm kidding.
>>SMITH: [LAUGHING]
>>NOORY: I'm kidding.
Do they wield that
kind of clout?
>>SMITH: Oh, yeah.
"The New York Times"
pointed out years ago
that someone at the FDA
said that the regulators did
everything that Big Ag asked
them to do and told them to do.
Trump, before he was
nominated, met with the CEO
of Monsanto and Bayer.
They're merging.
They have tremendous power.
I've traveled to 42 countries
speaking about GMOs.
And I'm usually briefed about
which part of the government
has been essentially
taken over by Monsanto.
And often times, I get people
admitting to me-- someone
who was a big regulator for
a country that I can't name,
he said in his first
meeting with Monsanto rep,
they said, oh, once
you approve our GMOs,
we're going to give you a very
well-paying job with Monsanto.
So it was a legal bribe, but
he decided not to go for it.
>>NOORY: Surely there
must be some scientists
at these companies that are
trying to do the right thing,
don't you think?
>>SMITH: I was at a lunch once
at a restaurant in St. Louis,
and I invited some people
to join us at the table.
And one was a
Monsanto scientist.
And we started talking
about various things.
And I said, when you
insert your gene,
you cause disruption
of that DNA.
We talked about this earlier.
You can have increased
allergens, toxins, et cetera.
How do you know you're not
disrupting in ways that you
can't even measure now?
And he couldn't respond.
He just didn't respond.
He just continued to eat.
And about two minutes later,
he looked up and said,
well, you know, we need GMOs.
I said, why?
To feed the world.
But he was completely wrong.
He had his numbers
wrong and the world's--
>>NOORY: But he believes that.
>>SMITH: He believed it.
Now, there was another guy
that was recruited by Monsanto
to sell their cotton.
And he read the words of
the CEO, Robert Shapiro,
about doing all these
great things for the world,
stood up at the meeting,
the orientation meeting
at the Monsanto headquarters,
and told everyone
about Robert Shapiro's words.
He was pulled over to the side
by a vice president who said,
wait a minute.
What Robert Shapiro
says is one thing.
What we do is something else.
He's the front man
who tells the story.
We don't even know what
he's talking about.
We're here to make money.
So then realized it was just a
story about saving the world.
It was just a
profit-driven company.
>>NOORY: And with the seeds,
aren't farmers now required
to buy seeds every
year because they
can no longer use the God-made
seeds that we used to have?
>>SMITH: More and more--
more and more.
So hybrid seeds often
don't breed true,
so you have to replace them.
But with GMOs, you actually
have to sign the contract
that you will not replant
your soybeans, for example.
Now, Monsanto has gone after
the seed cleaners from soybeans
and had terrible, terrible
influence on them,
sometimes theoretically,
or allegedly, attaching
tracking devices to their
car and going and visiting
all of them.
>>NOORY: No!
>>SMITH: Going and visiting
all of their consumers
or customers, threatening
them, taking them
to court, et cetera.
I've interviewed some of them.
It's absolutely horrible.
They've threatened hundreds
of farmers with lawsuits.
Sometimes they'll actually
take a farmer to court,
and they'll lose everything.
>>NOORY: One was
sued, wasn't he?
Because something
blew into his field.
>>SMITH: Absolutely
Percy Schmeiser-- he
never planted a genetically
modified canola,
but trucks passed his farm and
blew the canola seeds over.
Neighbor's canola blew over.
And he lost in the
Canadian Supreme Court
because he had Monsanto's
intellectual property,
their patented seeds,
growing on his property.
He harvested his canola,
like he did every year,
replanted it the next year,
and that act was illegal.
So, yeah, the farmers are
facing a lot of problems.
>>NOORY: How dangerous
is this, in your opinion?
>>SMITH: Well, if you
look at the charts,
there's over 30
diseases that rise
in parallel in relationship
to the increased
use of GMOs in Roundup.
If that was a correlation
that was actually causation,
then we're talking
about millions
upon millions of people having
bad health effects and possibly
death.
Roundup is a class
2A carcinogen.
The World Health
Organization said
it causes cancer in animals.
It causes mutations in human
DNA, which can lead to cancer.
And where it is sprayed,
there are higher levels
of cancer in the population.
So we're seeing higher
levels of cancer.
We're seeing levels of
fatty liver disease.
infertility, autism, diabetes.
And they all could
have explanation
in just the function,
how Roundup works
and how GMOs might
cause problems.
So I was not convinced
that it was so dangerous
until I started hearing
people's stories.
And the doctors tell me--
and it's in our film "Secret
Ingredients"-- that a certain
percentage of their patients,
even with autistic kids,
get better when they switch
to organic foods.
>>NOORY: When they switch.
>>SMITH: Not everyone,
but a certain percent.
>>NOORY: It helps.
It helps.
Advertising agencies
have done a great job
specifically targeting
products to certain audiences,
like children.
>> Little kids especially are
attracted by colorful packaging
and plastic toys.
I must admit, I used
to be one of them.
I also used to think
that all of our food
came from these happy little
farms where pigs rolled in mud
and cows grazed
on grass all day.
What I discovered
was this is not true.
I began to look into the
stuff on the internet,
in books, and in documentary
films, in my travels
with my family.
I discovered the dark side of
the industrialized food system.
First, there's genetically
engineered seeds in organisms.
That is when a seed is
manipulated in a laboratory
to do something not
intended by nature,
like taking the DNA of
a fish and putting it
into the DNA of a tomato--
yuck.
Don't get me wrong.
I like fish and tomatoes.
But this is just creepy.
>>NOORY: Is that you as a kid?
>>SMITH: [LAUGHING] You
know, the kids, they have it.
They understand.
I've spoken to fifth
and sixth graders.
I didn't have to dumb
down my talk at all.
They were like so on it.
>>NOORY: They get it.
>>SMITH: Yeah, completely.
Are they health wise?
>>SMITH: Well, they're
telling their parents
to switch to non-GMO.
>>NOORY: That's amazing, too.
Is there a targeted
marketing campaign to kids--
secretly?
>>SMITH: Well, I
think that they're
being targeted for all sorts
of modern American processed
foods, and most processed
foods contain GMOs.
But there's also coloring
books and whole curricula
that are imported into the
schools, created by Monsanto.
So they learn about
genetic engineering
as some great, new
future when they're
very young, coloring the
coloring books of the seeds
and the genes and the DNA.
So it's very dangerous,
and it doesn't
raise any of the concerns
that we're talking about.
>>NOORY: Jeffrey, in so many
cases with GMOs, people,
of course, are buying
these products,
not knowing what they're doing,
not knowing where they are.
Does it look like it's
going up or going down
in terms of the awareness
and the buying of GMOs?
>>SMITH: I'm happy to say,
George, after 21 years,
we're in the home stretch.
We officially declared in 2016
that the mainstream tipping
point in the United States
against GMOs had started.
Mainstream companies are
falling over themselves
to declare their
products as non-GMO.
Dannon said that in
three years, it's
going to be non-GMO animal feed.
Applegate-- same thing.
>>NOORY: I like that.
>>SMITH: Nestle, is as I
said, non-GMO coffee creamer
advertised on
television, Chipotle--
I can do the list.
I can go on and spend the rest
of the episode just describing
the mainstream companies
that are introducing more
and more products as non-GMO.
>>NOORY: Are they doing it
because it's the right thing
to do?
Or because they have to?
>>SMITH: No!
They're doing it
because they have to.
They're doing it to make money.
>>NOORY: It's a marketing ploy.
>>NOORY: Yeah, yeah.
They're doing it
because they have
to because so many Americans,
especially moms concerned
about kids who are most
at risk, are saying,
we don't want to
feed our kids GMOs.
We know what happens in the gut.
We know what happens
to the immune system,
to the gut bacteria, even
do the brain function.
Serotonin is really
important for our brain.
It's our friend.
It's created through building
blocks from the gut bacteria
through a particular
pathway that Roundup blocks.
And Monsanto has said for
years, oh, that pathway
is just in plants, and
so you can drink Roundup.
But our gut bacteria use
that metabolic pathway
to produce the building blocks,
the things that keep us happy
and not full of anxiety
and depression and in pain,
et cetera.
>>NOORY: Like the
cigarette industry, which
got nailed because of
internal things that they did,
might the same thing
be happening here?
>>SMITH: I hope so.
But we also saw that
the cigarette industry
rigged their research, or
what I call "tobacco science."
And that was imported
into the GMO world.
We have caught the biotech
industry red-handed
rigging their research to
avoid finding problems.
And it's pretty blatant.
>>NOORY: It is blatant.
>>NOORY: Now, what are you
doing to date to fight GMOs?
>>SMITH: Well,
what we're doing is
we're introducing
behavior change messaging
through the Institute for
Responsible Technology.
That's messaging
that gets people
to think twice or three
times about eating that corn
chip that might turn your
intestinal flora into living
pesticide factories
and cause holes
in the guts of your
bacteria, in the walls.
We introduce the science in a
clear, accurate way, translated
into English.
And we do it through
books and movies
and through lectures and speaker
training and activist groups.
And we're also
helping people stop
the spraying of these
dangerous chemicals
in their neighborhoods.
So at the Institute for
Responsible Technology,
we create a hub of
information and activism
so people can get involved,
both in the United States
and more and more
around the world.
>>NOORY: And are you
finding that people
are jumping on board to help?
>>SMITH: Absolutely.
In fact, we wouldn't have
been able to do anything
without that help.
We've trained 1,500 people
to speak about GMOs.
We've had over 100
groups meeting regularly
around North America.
People invite me
all over the world.
So it's actually taking hold.
>>NOORY: A lot of
the crops are being
treated with weed
killers, and those things
could be devastating, too.
>> The application of high doses
of these weed killers destroys
the weeds, upon which other
organisms normally would be
consuming.
So the insect
population is reduced.
And then there isn't
the insect population
upon which the birds
are also consuming.
So there could be
a knock-on effect.
>>NOORY: It's amazing what
they keep doing, Jeffrey,
about these weed killers.
>>SMITH: Well, Roundup
is the big weed killer,
and Roundup is very dangerous.
What happens is they overuse the
Roundup because the weeds gain
resistance.
And so you end up
with super weeds.
And the farmers are spraying
more and more Roundup
so that the amount
of weed killer
has gone up by about 527 million
pounds over the first 16 years
of GMOs because of the GMOs.
And so the conclusion that the
biotech industry has is not
to withdraw the technology
because it's failing,
but to now create
Agent Orange crops,
crops that are resistant to a
different weed killer, 2,4-D,
which was part of Agent
Orange used in the Vietnam War
as a defoliant and linked
to cancer and birth defects.
So that's been approved by
the United States government.
They're waiting to deploy that.
And they have also
dicamba-resistant and other
herbicide-tolerant
crops that will increase
the use of some of
these herbicides
by 25-fold in the country
and in our food supply.
And the Roundup is in such
high concentrations already.
It's in the air.
It's in the rain.
It's in the drinking water.
It's in our blood, in our urine.
And they found that
the amount that it
took for creating fatty liver
in rats and their daily dose
was about 425,000 times
less than the amount allowed
in humans on a per-bodyweight
basis by the EPA.
So we're talking about a tiny
amount of this ubiquitous weed
killer may be responsible
for this non-alcoholic fatty
liver, which 25% of
Americans are facing.
>>NOORY: Now they're talking
about genetically modified
mosquitoes.
>>SMITH: That's right.
>>NOORY: What the heck are they?
>>SMITH: I would
not like to be hired
to do a recall on
the genetically
modified mosquitoes.
>>NOORY: Or bitten by one.
>>SMITH: It's true.
So a company called
Oxitec from the UK
has genetically
engineered mosquitoes
so that the male mosquitoes will
mate with regular mosquitoes
and create supposedly
sterile larva so that they'll
reduce the population of
a certain type of mosquito
that's linked to
Dengue and Zika.
Now, it turns out they
have been misinforming
the public and regulators.
They said it was just the
males that would be released,
but there's a lot
of females that
have been released as well.
They said all the
offspring would be sterile,
because the males don't bite.
The females bite.
And it turns out that 3%
on average of the offspring
would not be sterile.
And in the case of when
there's some kind of antibiotic
in the atmosphere, then it
could be 15% to 18% not sterile.
And so I was talking to
a scientist from Oxitec.
And I said, what about the
saliva of the mosquito?
What if it's dangerous
and toxic to human blood?
You never even tested it.
He said, well, we're
just now testing
to see if the gene
expresses the new protein
in the saliva of the mosquito.
And I'm thinking, just now?
They've already released
millions of them
in four countries.
>>NOORY: I see disaster.
>>SMITH: Oh!
And I said, you know,
when you insert a gene,
you can create all
sorts of changes,
not just in the
protein that's created.
You can create new allergens
and new toxins, et cetera.
Shouldn't you be looking at the
entire profile of that saliva?
And you know what he said to me?
He said, good idea.
I mean, this is the
brain cell behind Oxitec.
>>NOORY: Coming from you, right?
>>SMITH: [LAUGHING]
>>NOORY: It's not good to play
around with Mother Nature.
>>SMITH: And they basically
want to genetically engineer
100% of all commercial seeds,
all insects, all livestock,
bacteria, algae, et cetera.
>>NOORY: All about profit.
>>SMITH: They want to
eliminate the nature of nature
and turn it into designer
organisms for profit
and control.
Now, once you do that,
there's no reversal.
You are basically--
>>NOORY: You've wiped
out everything else.
>>SMITH: You have changed
everything into man-made DNA,
and that self-propagates.
So this generation is faced
with a decision that's
unprecedented in our history--
whether we're going
to do this or not.
>>NOORY: What's the
only way to stop this?
>>SMITH: Well, we could
pretend that the government
is going to bail us out.
>>NOORY: That's
not gonna happen.
>>SMITH: That's
It comes down to
changing the marketplace.
So even though we really
want all GMOs taken out
of the food, taken out
of outdoor release,
rather than going to the
Senate or the Congress,
which has been actually
working against us,
we go to consumers, to moms.
And we say, are you
sure you want to eat it?
This is what happened to rats.
This is what happened to mice.
This is what happened to
animals when they ate it.
This is what's happening
to other people
when they report they
get off the stuff
and how they get better.
And then they're
saying, oh, my god.
They're changing their
diet, and the food industry
is responding.
So in order to protect the
genetic integrity of this
and all future generations,
it may be the increased sales
of certain processed foods at
Walmart that drives the change.
>>NOORY: Jeffrey, you're
working on a brand new movie
to help educate the
world about GMOs.
>> I've removed genetically
modified food and had the kids
eat all organic food--
no pesticides, no GMOs.
And the changes I've
seen are remarkable.
>> So we went from,
your son has autism,
your daughter has asthma,
to, no, they don't.
>> It's been eight years
since my diagnosis.
I compete in triathlons,
and I feel great.
>> I am 22 weeks pregnant,
and I feel fantastic.
>> This shift can only come
by a global desire to change
our food supply.
>> The removal of genetically
modified foods, glyphosate,
and pesticides was
the fundamental,
the foundation for
why we all recovered.
>>NOORY: That's
exciting, Jeffrey.
Good for you.
>>SMITH: It's amazing.
I hear more testimonials
about the effects
of removing GMOs and switching
to organic than perhaps
anyone in the world.
And when I released
my previous film,
"Genetic Roulette,"
I was besieged
by these type of stories.
And so I felt this
incredible pressure
to share this with the world.
Because I became more
convinced than ever.
I mean, I'm talking to,
let's say, 2,500 doctors
at a conference, and I say,
how many people are removing
GMOs from your patients' diets?
And all these hands go up.
I said, OK, what
are you noticing?
And it's these type of things.
>>NOORY: And
they're real things.
>>SMITH: There are three
autistic kids in our film.
Two are no longer
autistic, and one
was so better he switched
to a mainstream classroom
for the first time.
And the main reason the parents
say was switching to organic.
>>NOORY: What do
you call this movie?
>>SMITH: "Secret Ingredients."
>>NOORY: "Secret ingredients."
>>SMITH: The website is
SecretIngredientsMovie.com.
≫>NOORY: As we look at
the future of our own health,
of our own well-being, it would
seem like government is going
to continue pushing
the corporate angle.
We've got to keep
fighting back this way.
Have you in your
career, Jeffery,
ever felt as if they
were out to get you?
>>SMITH: Probably yes, always.
[LAUGHING] I mean, if you look--
you can Google my name,
and you can find our stuff,
and you can find their
disinformation campaign,
where they try and create all
sorts of half truths about me.
And I was just reading
something about this
this morning, how they
completely try and mess up
the reader, thinking that
everything that I say is wrong,
so don't bother looking at it.
They don't want people
to read the evidence.
Because we have
caught them red-handed
covering up their problems.
And so I don't bother trying
to find all the instances where
they're discrediting me.
I actually ignore it.
Because if I can reach out and
convince a million people here
and a half a
million people there
and a whole country over there,
it's a numbers game, George.
If we can move enough
people into non-GMO eating,
it doesn't matter if
they've defamed me
all over the internet.
Because we win, they
lose their salary,
they go away, we end up
with a non-GMO food supply.
>>NOORY: If we didn't have
GMOs, what would Jeffery Smith
be doing right now?
>>SMITH: I think about
that from time to time.
I'll let you know.
>>NOORY: It is an interesting,
perplexing question.
>>SMITH: I would have
put myself out of a job.
That's my goal.
>>NOORY: You seem like you're
the Ralph Nader of consumerism,
though.
>>SMITH: Well, I
named the Institute
for Responsible
Technology as such so
that I have an option that
once we get rid of GMOs,
I can go to other technologies
that are irresponsible
and take them into
the responsible side.
>>NOORY: It's good to know
you're watching things for us.
>>SMITH: Happy to do that.
>>NOORY: Thank you, Jeffrey.
>>SMITH: Thank you.
>>NOORY: "Beyond Belief."
This program is
set up, of course,
for you to hear the mysteries
of this planet, the mysteries
of this universe, but also
events that are happening right
now that affect all of us.
And I can't think of a
bigger event than something
that we're eating that
could harm our lives.
People like Jeffrey
Smith are out there
defending and fighting
for us, and we'll
do the same thing for you.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]